Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined for a 4th time by Doctor
Kevin Mitchell. He's associate Professor of Genetics and neuroscience
at Trinity College Dublin. Last time we talked about
his book Free Agents, our evolution gave us Free
Will. And today we're going to talk a little
bit more about free will and in the meantime,
Doctor Mitchell have a couple of debates with Doctor
Robert Sapolsky. We're also going to talk a little
bit about that and also about his recent paper,
the genomic code, the genome instantiates a generative model
of the organism. And toward the end, a little
bit about human embryo editing. So Doctor Mitchell, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have you
back.
Thanks, Ricardo. Thanks for having me back. Always a
pleasure to chat.
OK, so I would like to ask you a
few questions that I left out in our previous
conversation about your book on free will. So, what
is the lowest level of analysis we have to
go down when it comes to biochemistry to understand
the evolution of free will and how it works?
Yeah, um, it's such an interesting question, and I've
been, I've been hanging out with philosophers so much
that I have this, uh, I have this trigger
now to, to when someone asked me a question
to think, oh, where's that question coming from and
why is it phrased that way? And I think
what's interesting here is there's like there's this impulse
when we look at um some complicated phenomenon. Like,
uh, humans apparently having free will, where the phenomenon
is we see that we're, uh, making decisions. It
feels internally like we're thinking about things and deliberating
and making choices and so on, right. So So
the question is like how could we account for
that? Um, AND there's a natural impulse, I think
in in traditional sort of science to look down
for the explanation, to say, OK, well, clearly your
mind is thinking about something you've got goals and
beliefs and so on. That are informing your decision,
but actually that's just neural states, right? So we
can look down a level, um, from cognition to
the level of neuroscience and say, well, here, look,
there's these patterns of neural states, and then we
can go a little further and say, actually, you
know what, what's happening in the brain is really
these biochemical, um, triggers are, are, are moving around.
We've got proteins moving in and out, ions moving
in and out, um, and, you know, there's there's
some sort of biochemical molecular goings on. And there's
a temptation, I think, to to think that's where
the true causal explanation lies. We go down, down,
down, and we see all these biochemical machinations, right,
these mechanisms at play, and then we say, OK,
that's why you made a decision, because these ions
moved from here to there in these neurons and
these neurotransmitters were detected by those receptors and that's
it, we're done. And and so I, I, I
want to resist that impulse and I wanna say
actually for um a phenomenon like this of a
whole organism doing complex context dependent behavior informed by
its history, we have to look up, right? We
have to look at the whole thing. We have
to take a holistic view of it and say,
um, OK, yeah, there's, of course, it depends on
all of this neural machinery, all this biochemistry. But
that it can't be reduced to that. Decision making
is not just a bunch of ions moving around.
It's the sort of I guess uh manipulation of
meaningful patterns that that means something to the organism.
Where there's a there's a cognitive economy that uh
depends on, on neural machinery, but it runs on
meaning. And that I think is, is um is
really the crucial. Difference, I think that frees us
from this reductive idea where uh you know, it
doesn't it doesn't mean we're invoking some kind of
magic, right? We can still see the machine needs
to be there and you know, from neurology and
genetics we can see the differences in the way
the machine is put together affect things like decision
making. So it's still very materialistic in that sense.
It's just not um it's just not reductive. And
I guess the other aspect of your of your
question maybe was to think. In evolutionary terms, um,
how far back do we have to go to
get a handle on things like purpose and meaning
and value, right? And that's where I think taking
a, um, a view of the simple biochemistry of
organisms, you know, like bacteria. I shouldn't say simple,
it's it's actually quite complex, but much simpler than
our um kind of cognitive systems. Like how can
we get a handle on something like purpose? Uh,
IN an, again, in a non-magical, non-mystical kind of
a way, by thinking about what bacteria are doing.
And you know, this basically the drive to survive
any complex system like that is is uh can
be configured in ways that favor its persistence or
that don't, right? And the ones that the configurations
that do favor uh persistence persist, and those are
the ones that we see and of course they
have adaptations to keep favoring their persistence and doing
that work. And you know, in bacteria that's done
with biochemical systems. Uh, WHEN, when multicellular organisms arose,
they had to kind of reinvent the systems to
um figure out what's out in the world and,
and, um, and mount appropriate adaptive responses to it.
But do you classify single-celled organisms like bacteria as
agents and when exactly in evolution does agency really
come into play?
Yeah, my, so my feeling and I'm not a
um I don't like to try and draw, you
know, bright lines, but my feeling is that actually
agency is pretty much coextensive with life as we
know it. That is that even single-celled organisms like
bacteria have some kind of at least a proto
agency in the sense that um, They're, they're controlling
their behavior in a holistic integrative kind of a
way, you know, they're they're not just passive stimulus
response machines, they're endogenously active and they're accommodating to
new information, but they're integrating multiple sources of information
at a time. Uh, INTEGRATING it with respect to
their recent history, with respect to their internal states,
with respect to the, uh, the external context, and
all in the service of agent level reasons, right?
So their their parts don't have reasons for doing
anything, but the whole organism does in you could
say they're as if reasons, right? They're just evolution's
reasons. Um, BUT I think the effect is the
same. We get a goal directed behavior, it's directed
towards whatever favors persistence, that may be going towards
a food source, it may be going away from,
uh, toxic chemicals or or something that could eat
it, right? Um, YOU know, so, so those kinds
of things are all active and I think that's
perfectly reasonable to think of bacteria, uh, in agential
terms. Now it's not very sophisticated, right? There aren't
there aren't. There aren't many levels of behavioral control
that it's engaged in. But it is still very
much a holistic. Organismal kind of activity as opposed
to pure, purely just uh just mechanism.
And when we talk about organisms which already have
a nervous system, is there anything at the neuronal
level or the neural uh molecular machinery that is
important to consider, to under Stand free will. I
mean, something about synapses, neurotransmitters, uh, membrane receptors, something
like that, that is important to understand where free
will, uh, comes from molecularly.
I guess I'd say two things there. Um, FIRST
of all, it's important to understand how noisy that
all is, right? You know, how, how, um, just
messy and jittery and jiggly all of this, the,
the molecular machinery is down there. I mean, you've
got individual molecules that are jittering around, there's all
kinds of thermal fluctuations. They're being bombarded by collisions,
maybe like billions of times a second. Every molecule
is just being hit by other molecules billions of
times a second. So you've got this big noisy
maelstrom of stuff down there and it's amazing that
there's any functionality at all, right? It's incredible that
actually evolution has crafted these systems that are generally
speaking robust to that noise. They can still do
things effectively at a slightly higher sort of microscopic
systems level. Just because of the the way that
they that that that evolution has configured them. Um,
IN a way that the microscopic organization allows things
to happen, right? And so, but that's really the
key. It's and it it gets us away from
the idea that everything at the low level is
really deterministic and all the causes are coming bottom
up because actually it's just there's a load of
random stuff happening down there, that has to be
harnessed in a sense, at a slightly higher microscopic
level for anything useful to happen. And that is
a kind of a key aspect to understanding how
Free will can emerge because free will is just
a this uh it's a type of microscopic causation,
and it's a type of top-down causation and and
some people hear that, they hear top-down causation and
they think it's some mystical thing that sort of
uh violates the tenets or principles of materialism, and
it doesn't. It's just saying that the way a
system is organized. CAN have some causal effects on
what happens. And it's a move away from Um,
thinking only in terms of what we can call
production causes, the sort of physical causes where there's
some oomph to it, you know, something hits something
else and there's a physical force and you can
understand a transmission of of energy and momentum and
you know, some people think that those are the
only real causes, those sorts of physical causes. But
actually what happens in a system. IS dependent on
all kinds of other things, right? There's all sorts
of dependence causes. What's the material that things are
made out of? What's the configuration that they're in,
which will determine The outcome of of the the
way physical forces play out and even determine the
distribution of physical forces in the first place. So
those dependence causes. I think are really key to
understanding free will because in the nervous system, the
way some pattern of neural activity is uh the
the effects that it has is not just a
matter of like electricity hitting another neuron. This neuron
is interpreting what's happening. It's asking what are my
inputs and what should I do about them? And
that depends on the configuration of the of the
synapses. So, you know, down at that level. If
you're asking what's important to think about in the
neural system, the configuration of the system is doing
interpretive work. And that for me is really key.
That's why, you know, I like to say that
the the system runs on meaning. Because the effect
of any pattern of neural activity is highly, highly
context dependent and That context is, first of all,
reflects the history of the organism. Uh, BUT secondly
reflects the current state of the organism. So, you
know, when you engage attention, when you change arousal,
when you adopt a goal, when you, uh, understand
something that you didn't understand before. There's top-down effects
that change the local configuration of synapses and there's,
you know, neuromodulatory effects and so on. And, and
so those are the neural mechanisms whereby top down
mental causation um can play out again without having
any ghost in the machine.
So I have these questions save for later, but
since you mentioned causation and particularly top-down causation, let
me ask you, uh, when it comes to causation,
do you think that our Western scientific tradition equips
us well cognitively with the appropriate tools and framework
to understand it? Uh. Because as you said, uh,
I can't remember exactly the terms you use, but,
uh, sometimes when we think about a top-down position,
it seems a little bit esoteric and that in
a way it would negate materialism or something like
that. So what do you make of that?
Yeah, I think so. I mean, if you look
at the history of, um, Of causation, uh, the
philosophy of causation and, and of scientific thought, then
I mean this is a kind of a potted
history, but you know, you can look back to
Aristotle, for example, who had a very pluralistic notion
of causation. And he talked about, uh, he, he
used some slightly weird terminology be translated as, for
example, the efficient cause and the material cause. So
those would be things where basically like, what's what's
the system, what's the stuff in the system made
out of and what are the forces that are
at play? OK, so it's, it's matter in motion.
Those are, those are his causes. And those are
perfectly good ways of thinking about causation within a
system, but they're limited. They're not, they don't capture
everything. Because he had 22 other kinds of causes
that he thought about. One was what he called
the formal cause. Um, WHICH it doesn't really translate
into modern thought very directly, but the way I
think of it is basically the configuration of the
system. Um, WHICH, which is imposing some constraints on
what can happen. It's just shaping the possibility space.
And then, uh, most famously, there was the final
cause in his sense it was, what is this
for? Why did this happen? If you want to
say why did something happen, you can ask how
come it happened? How did it come to happen,
but also what for? Why did it happen? And
that's a kind of a cause that that um.
You know that tele teleology kind of got banished
from Western scientific thought and very explicitly by um
Francis Bacon in the um 16th or 17th century,
I can't remember exactly. Where, you know, he basically
exhorted people to just think about material and efficient
causes and to not worry about these final causes
which seemed again kind of magical because it it
it seems like the end point, which is in
the future, is some, is somehow reaching backwards in
time and changing things right now, right, which obviously
can't happen, shouldn't happen, that kind of retro causality
is highly suspect. But you can just flip that
around and say, no, that's not, that's not what's
happening at all. When an animal has a goal.
Yeah. It, there's a causal efficacy of it's having
a goal right now. It's not the future end
state that's having an effect. It's the fact that
the organism wants to get to it. That's what's
having an effect, and that's a present state, that's
a current state. And so there's no real problem
with incorporating that. We just have to have a
slightly more expansive view of causation that isn't so
um focused on, you know, matter in motion. And
that encompasses these these broader dependence causes or configurational
causes, and I think we're, you know, neuroscience is
actually moving that way partly because the experimental methods
that we have are now allowing us to do
that, you know, we're able to record more neurons
in an awake behaving animals and we're able to
look at more contextual kind of stuff as opposed
to simple. Isolated neurons or circuits, um, which, you
know, the danger of that reductive approach is that
it makes it look like any behavior. IS being
caused by the activity of certain bits within the
organism, where the organism's not doing anything as an
agent, it's being pushed around by its parts. And
that's a, that's a danger of the uh paradigm
of trying to isolate functions to specific neural circuits,
when in fact that anything that's happening within the
brain is always being interpreted in this more holistic
global context.
There's also I think a very interesting question here
surrounding how we understand ontology because there's, for example,
process ontology and substance ontology, and we in the
west tend to think more in terms of Substances
instead of processes. Do you think that that distinction
is also important to keep in mind to understand
how uh neural systems operate and how free will
comes about?
Yeah, absolutely, I think, I mean, I'm I'm very
much in favor of a process view. I probably
don't go all the way that some people do
where they say, you know, the essence of things
is processes and objects are just really slow processes.
I don't, I mean, I don't really find that
super helpful. Um I think we can still think
of objects and and and entities, but they're engaged
in processes and what I want to think I
guess is that the The properties that anything has
are inherently relational. They're always involved. Every property, even
something like mass, you know, where you would say
that this, this subatomic particle has a mass. Well,
that's that's a relation, right? That's a relational property
with the, you know, the Higgs field or whatever
else it is, right? So, so, you know, when
we start thinking in in cognitive science terms, I
like to think much more in terms of activities
than objects. So even something like the word mind,
you know, you say I have a mind, it's
something's on my mind. It sounds like a noun,
right? It sounds like an object, like a place
where things are happening, where uh to me it's
just mind is a verb, you know, it's a
it's mentality is a is a set of processes
that have certain relations uh or that support certain
relations both sort of internally, cognitively and and and
between the organism and its environment. And Um, you
know, you could say the same thing with something
like the term representation, where we'll say, you know,
the, the, within the brain there is a representation
of something out in the world. Like right now,
um, you know, you're looking at my face and
you've got a representation of my face in your
fusiform face area. That's that's fine, it's like it's
not wrong, it's just not super useful because it's
more interesting to me to say that you are
representing, right, as an activity and that that activity
requires not just the presence of that particular pattern
of activity, but the way that it's interpreted by
other parts of the of the brain and what
it means to you as an organism. And so
I think, you know, moving to this kind of
process view where we're talking about activity and relations.
Um, JUST better captures what's actually happening. There aren't
isolated elements and, and, and objects, even there aren't
isolated cognitive objects. There are things that we may
be thinking about. And that thinking may be supported
by current activational state of populations of neurons. But
those, uh, the, the meaning of those neurons inheres
in the connections that they have with other parts
of the brain, right? The meaning is evoked, it's
not, it's not contained in a in a local
pattern. The local pattern doesn't do anything by itself,
it has to be interpreted. So, Yeah, I think,
I, I guess more than just the distinction between
the substance and process ontology, I guess I'm, I'm
favoring these days a much more dynamical relational view
of of what's going on.
So let me ask you a different kind of
question now. When we are simulating possible courses of
action when we are in the process of decision
making, do we know why certain possibilities spring to
mind and not others? I mean, because in many
instances, I'm not sure if in all instances, but
at least in many instances, it seems to be
that there would. Be a near infinitude of possibilities
to consider, but that's not how our decision making
processes work. We only tend to consider a limited
number of possibilities.
Yeah, exactly, and I think that's really key because
um you've hit on the, on the problem of
behavioral control, right? We, we have too many options,
we just have this infinity of options. Um, AND,
and we can't in any scenario, run through them
all in some sort of rational calculation that's weighing
them all up because we'd be dead, right? You
know, we just have to do something fast. So,
um, decision making has to involve lots of heuristics.
It has to involve, first of all, habits where
there's literally just habits of behavior where effectively we
don't have to think about it at all, right?
We just, we just know in this scenario do
X or do Y, right? Because it's worked out
well in the past. So that's really um useful,
that's a way to offload um the cognitive work
to cashed policies, which we've learned are are good.
But we also have habits of thought, and that's
equally important in that in a given scenario, we
may not know exactly what to do, but we
may have certain sort of uh more um practiced
ways of thinking about what to do, right? So
there may be some set of options that will
occur to us that's highly constrained, right? So it's
already narrowing down the possibility space or the search
space, um, for thinking about what to do, which
is again, Super effective most of the time, right?
And so the challenge is when um we encounter
a completely novel scenario where we're really out of
our depth, we have no idea what to do
and then you know, often the best thing to
do is wait, is to gather more information. Um,
FOR example, or sometimes if we have to act
to just do something kind of slightly at random
and actually, you know, in many cases we may
make use of the noisy, um, elements of uh
of neural signaling and just allow that to um
to drive a a a behavior when we don't
know what we should do or we don't care
what we should do we should do something. So
there's, you know, there's always some some noisiness at
play there. But what's interesting, you know, in this
sort of scenario you're you're thinking about when ideas
pop into our mind. We could say, OK, where
did that idea come from? Well, usually they don't
come from nowhere. They're usually informed by um our
kind of just general background knowledge of how things
work and how we should behave, right? So they're
not random completely. But there may be various options
that um that occur to us. And then there's
a model which actually goes back to William James
at least, called the two-stage model of free will,
where the idea is, given some scenario you find
yourself in. Some um options occur to you and
you know in in neuroscience terms you could say
some patterns of activity within the within the parts
of the cerebral cortex which represent possible actions become
primed or or activated. And then they get submitted
to this evaluation system. So, um, this, you know,
the current thinking at least is that this involves
the basal ganglia, um, you know, evaluative systems in
the midbrain, the thalamus, and then loops that go
back to the back to the cortex, and you
can think about this as, you know, these competing
patterns that are vying for control of the motor
system. Where actually what the basal ganglia are doing
is, is most of the time just putting the
brakes on the motor system. They're absolutely just stopping
everything until they decide in this competition to let
one of those actions through and that can drive,
um, you know, the the motor command centers, that's
that's one way to look at it. So in
that scenario, um, you know, James famously said, my
thoughts come to me freely. My actions go from
me willfully, right? So you've got a sense there
where you're, you're, yeah, there is some randomness in
what occurs to you to do. Constrained by prior
knowledge, but then you're making these evaluative decisions based
on what you think is gonna turn out the
best.
Do, I mean, do you think that we should
think about the fact that we do not consider
all possibilities that would be out there in our
decision making a constraint on free will because, you
know, probably this is something that Robert support. AND
other people like him would say that or would
argue that because um we are, we are influenced
by our uh prior experiences in terms of what
kinds of options spring, spring to mind that would
be. Uh, AN argument against free will.
Yeah, well, OK, so there's two ways to look
at this. One is to say, um, it's only
free will if there are no prior causes affecting
you whatsoever, right? There's no constraints whatsoever from your
past, um, or towards the future or Anything else,
right, which is kind of a weird scenario if
you take it to its logical conclusion, like you
would just be doing random stuff, right? You can't
have, you're not allowed to have any memories, any
goals, any preferences, any habits, any attitudes or dispositions
or policies or commitments or ongoing projects or anything
that makes you you. And uh just at every
moment, you'd have to be doing something random. And
you know, obviously that's not life isn't like that,
right? I mean, it's very, very basic what life
is, what life does, what living organisms do is
make themselves happen. Right, they continuously make themselves happen
through time. Out of all the things that could
happen, they make this happen where this is their
continued existence. And so that's the whole thing, like
that's life's whole shtick is is this sort of
historicity. So to imagine this scenario where you're ultimately
free and can do anything you want, where you'd
have to ask, well, why would you want anything?
You wouldn't be, you wouldn't be you. There there'd
be no self there, right? OK, so that's the
first um thing. The other thing is to say,
Well, to get back to what I just said
a minute ago, that these constraints are from your
past are super, super adaptive, right? I mean, you,
you just can't in every scenario work through every
possible thing that you could do with your body,
right? Like, I mean, just imagine all the things
you could do with your body right now that
you're not doing. So, um, you don't have to
think about the 99.999999% of those, right? There's only
little little options where you do think about it.
And so, you know, what, what Robert Sapolsky argues
is that all of those past effects. Your genetics,
human evolution generally, the way your brain developed, you
know, what hormones you were exposed to in the
womb, and then all the experiences that have happened
to you. Narrow down your decision making to one.
To one option. In every scenario, it's determined what
you're going to do by all of those prior
factors. And there's simply no evidence for that whatsoever.
Right, of course there are influences, but what he
does is look at all these sort of separate
influences and say, well, gosh, that's a lot. It
seems to me like they must collectively preclude anything
being up to up to you as an agent.
And that's just kind of vibes. It like there's
really no scientific evidence for that whatsoever. It doesn't
fit with uh the phenomenology of our experience of
of deliberation. It doesn't fit with the neuroscience that
we see of decision making under conflict. Where you
can literally see these kinds of competitions uh happening
where, you know, this the the decision making, the
behavioral control is not this instantaneous transition from a
state to another state. It's like, OK, I, I'm
now in state A, I, I'm at T T
and uh it's just a physical system and it's
configured a certain way and it's gonna go to
state B at time T + 1. Like those
are some some instantaneous transition. It's a process, right?
Deliberation, when we're really, you know, deliberating under conflict,
takes time. We have to, we don't we don't
just run through, uh, you know, inputs into the
algorithm as if, as if the algorithm is all
set up to deal with this novel scenario. In
any new scenario, we have to figure out what
the weights of the algorithm should be, right? We
have to figure out what's relevant to us now.
And work through that process and um weigh up
these alternatives and then choose one. It feels like
that's what we're doing. The neuroscience shows that's what
we're doing and there's no reason to think that
that can be sort of short circuited or that
there's just some lookup table that we can um
appeal to in every scenario that we're in. And
to me, um, that just is you making a
decision. Like, yes, it involves your brain, of course
it does. Uh, BUT what else would it involve?
You know, just because there's bits, there's a physical
instantiation of it, doesn't mean it's not you doing
it, and I think that, you know, Robert's um
Uh, view with respect to him, I think has
this underlying dualism to it. It's like every time
we show some of the neuroscience of decision making,
he thinks, aha, see? It's not you, it's your
brain. But that's just like uh that's just a
dualist idea that the only thing that would satisfy
him is if we could find the ghost in
the machine. And of course, he says, like a
good materialist, there can't be a ghost in the
machine, therefore there's no free will.
And, but at a certain point in your book,
you say that it can pay off to behave
randomly sometimes. Could you explain that?
Yeah, well, I mean, uh, a good example is
when creatures are escaping from a predator. And in
fact many, many animals um have systems that basically
randomize their, their escape trajectory. So they have like
a jump response or something like that. I'm thinking
of insects for example. Um, BUT the direction in
which they jump is highly indeterministic. And it seems
to vary uh along with just some some noisy
conditions in the in the nervous system at the
moment. And that's adaptive because um if you were
really predictable, you know, if you always escaped one
direction, then predators could just take advantage of that,
right? So if you're super predictable, you're lunch and
that's uh that's just bad, right? So, so I
think organisms can allow some randomness to be at
play in in that kind of scenario. And you
know, we talked about this a minute ago, this
idea of ideas popping into your head, and there's
a certain scenario where Some ideas pop into your
head, you try them out, right? You've got some
goals and you know, but we don't just take
decisions and then that's it. We monitor those decisions,
right? So our behavioral control is very much extended
through time. It's not just these momentary um decisions.
We're we're we're engaged. Activities and we monitor those
for some time to see if we're achieving our
goals. Now, if we're not, then there's mechanisms that
involve um release of norepinephrine from the locus cerulius,
which is the the blue spot in the, in
the hindbrain or midbrain, um which Uh, goes to
the cortex and basically kind of allows there to
be a bit more noise. It sort of raises
the temperature of the system, um, in a, in
an information theoretic, uh, use of the term temperature
there and Sort of shakes the shakes the system
up a little bit, shakes it out of its
ruts of habits of thought and broadens the search
space. And you know, you can see how that's
adaptive if it it's kind of the equivalent of
going back to the drawing board and thinking outside
the box, right? So thinking. Creatively by taking advantage
of a little bit of of of noisiness which
just allows you to explore a wider search space.
And you can see, you know, a parallel with
evolutionary search there where evolution depends on random variation,
uh, generating options which it then tests and it's
sort of a similar analogous situation there.
Do you think that what you explore in your
book in terms of free will and that applies
to biological systems could also apply to artificial intelligence
systems?
Yeah, I mean, this is where this becomes much
more than an abstract um philosophical debate that you
have down the pub on a Friday night, right?
Um, SO it becomes really important because, uh, we
can think beyond the the yes or no question,
do we have free will or not? And instead
we can ask um what are the systems that
support. Rational cognitive behavioral control and what are the
systems of of goal, um, you know, gold um
choice, action choice, nested hierarchical control, motivations, simulation, evaluation,
right, all of those things have have neural basis
to them. Um, AND we can think about those
in both in terms of the really, really particulars
of the operations that are going on, but also
in a slightly more abstract way, again, in a
more relational way. We can say, what are the
kinds of cognitive operations that an agent has to
be able to do in order to get around
in the world, right? Where do its goals come
from? Um, HOW does it decide between them? How
does it basically, um, solve this big optimization problem
when faced with novel, unpredictable, uncertain, uh, environments and
limited information and time pressures to, to act, OK.
So we can get, and we are getting a
handle on those kinds of systems, how they work,
what functionalities they engender, and how they can be
put together to enable adaptive action. Now with all
of that knowledge, there's there's nothing to stop us,
I think, from saying, OK, we could absolutely operationalize
that in an artificial system. We could do it
in a virtual agent. Wandering around in Minecraft or
something like that or we could do it in
a robot that's actually encountering the real world. The
difference I think from, you know, current AI systems
like chat GPT and stuff like that is those
systems are not embodied, they're not engaging with the
world, they're just, they're not designed to, right? They're
not, nobody was trying to make them really be
agents. Uh, THEY have no sort of causal. Relationship
with the world, right? They're not doing things, noticing
the outcomes of their actions, uh, updating their model
of the world accordingly and so on. They're not,
they're just not immersed in, uh, in an environment.
But there's no reason why you couldn't make things
that have those kinds of um embodiment, embeddedness and
um what you might call, you know, in mindedness.
We're not, they're not just embodied, but they have
a a a cognitive architecture. That, uh, basically gives
them some kind of mentality, some kind of subjective
experience within the world, where they distinguish themselves as
an entity from the rest of the world, where
they understand, uh, that they have a causal influence
on the world and vice versa, their modeling self
and world and the relations between those. It it
seems quite possible in principle. At least I, I
see, I see no argument against it in principle
that um that we could build systems like that.
People are working on it. I think we'll get
to things in short order that we have to
um allow, have some kind of agency and then
we're gonna be in a world of ethical and
practical dilemmas that we're gonna have to grapple with.
So you think that if we are able to
someday build AI systems that are embodied and embedded,
I mean, probably the the full 4E cognition uh
there, uh, that they could possibly have free will
as well.
Yeah, again, I think that, you know, the, the
answer here is to is to back away from
the metaphysical and just operationalize what we mean by
free will. So, um, would it have behavioral autonomy?
Would it be able to make its own goals
not along the way, right? Not just uh play
out the the the the goals that were preprogrammed
into it. Would it have some individual agency, um,
in terms of Both choice and control, right, so
choice in the sense that it has options, um,
both it has options in the world, but it
also has internal options, right? It's there's nothing predetermined
as we were just talking about, about its cognitive
operations. There's some play there. And control in the
sense that given that there's some play in in
its cognitive operations in in deliberating about what to
do. There's scope for it to have top down.
Uh, CONTROL over what it does based on its
current high-level goals, the goals of the entity, right?
Not the, not the, just the activity of its
parts because the parts don't have goals, right? And
so if we can build a system like that.
That's acting autonomously in the world, that's learning things,
that's accumulating a Um, from its history, it's accumulating
causal potential. Right, you know, it's building up a
knowledge of the world that's giving it greater causal
control in the world. To me that would be
an agent. Um, IF you wanted to say it
had free will, you know, that there's so much
baggage around that that term, you could argue back
and forth, but for all intents and purposes, it
wouldn't be any different from something that we would
say does have free will. That's You know, that's
a sort of pragmatic way of um approaching what
could otherwise devolve into a semantic dispute.
OK, so let's talk a little bit about your
debates with Robert Sapolsky. I watched two of them.
I'm not sure if there are more out there.
I watched one in late 2023 and another one
last year. So, what would you say you learned
from them?
Um, IT'S interesting, so. In, I mean, so Robert
is a, you know, he's a great neuroscientist, um,
and as two neuroscientists, it's interesting that we sort
of look at things with very through very different
perspectives and we look at somewhat the same body
of evidence, not completely. Um, AND we just take
very different kind of conclusions from it. And usually
when that's the case, there's some underlying premises that
differ, right? We're, we're bringing different things to the
party, um, that, that kind of explain that. And
I guess for me, my sense is. Again, with
respect, that that Robert has this kind of closet
dualism, where he defines free will, both in an
absolutist sense, that is, if there's any prior causes
whatsoever, then you're not completely free, you don't have
free will, it just doesn't count. I find that
notion incoherent for the reasons that we discussed earlier
because you wouldn't be you if there weren't any
prior causes. Um, AND then secondly, uh, you know,
there's this sort of dualist intuition that I think
he, he has, although he'd absolutely deny it, right?
Um, BUT where he will say, you know, he,
he wants to say that free will, um, is
somehow in the brain but not of the brain.
Or in biology, but not of biology, use those
kinds of phrasings where it's like we're stuck either,
you know, as we do our sort of materialistic
project of of neuroscience, it seems like all of
the causation is located in the brain. And there's
nothing left for us to do. And you know,
I just think that's wrong and it's wrong because
it it's it's it locates all the causes at
the lowest levels, and we can get out of
that. Um, BY thinking about emergence, which is another
sort of philosophical thorny issue, um, that some people
are kind of allergic to, because it sounds like
you're getting some kind of magical thing popping out
of um a system when you organize it a
certain way. And, you know, I think you can
think of emergence as um Well, you have to
think of it, you have to think of selection
at the same time, right? It's like a system
could be configured in lots of different ways. Now,
you're not gonna get functionalities by chance, uh, you
know, that persist. You're only going to get good
functionalities because they've been selected for, right? So you
can, you can get this sort of top uh
microscopic configurations. That um it's not just that there
are properties that you see at that at those
emergent levels, it's that there are powers. That in
here at the higher levels. And they constrain what's
going on at the lower levels, right? It's just
not the case that all the causation is bottom
up. And that's a uh a concept again, that
um I think Robert and I differ on our
views of that and I in that I don't
see any problem with that. And but I think
he thinks it's a kind of a, uh, again,
it's it's it's something magical about it. I don't
think that's true. So, um, yeah, so those are
some of the things I guess the other aspect
would be, you know, it is interesting to think
about the evidence that we lean on. So. For
Robert, a lot of it is kind of almost
epidemiological behaviorism where he'll say, OK, we can find,
if we look across many people, we can see
that people with this exposure could be, you know,
this genetic variant or uh a history of child
abuse or higher levels of hormones in the womb,
you know, across this population of people, they tend
to behave like this more than statistically more than
other people, right? So, so that that kind of
evidence suggests that there are these influences on our
behavior, but it's very statistical, right? It's in the
aggregate, it's patterns of behavior, um where there are
influences, but they're not determinants, right? Individually none of
them is a is a determinant and collectively there's
no reason to think that they all are determinants
either. So you can look at that those kinds
of studies and um. First of all, some of
those studies are just bad, like there's some like
history of candidate gene association studies, which are just
inflating the apparent um effect that particular genetic variants
have on our behavior, say. Um, THERE'S like social
priming studies which again inflate the, uh, idea that
unconscious things are driving our behavior. I mean that
whole literature is suspect. And then there's a bunch
of other sort of, um, studies that are effectively
flawed. Sometimes fatally so, where, you know, collectively the
problem is that they give this impression of all
these big, big effects. It's like we're not we're
just being buffeted around by all of these prior
things or current states of the world that we're
not really conscious of or in control of. And
that paints a picture in a rhetorical sense, not
in a, not in an actual edifice of scientific
evidence. It just seems like it makes it feel
like we're really not in control of anything. Um,
BUT if you back off of that and you
actually look at, you know, the neuroscience of decision
making in real time, not just like what are
the effects prior that that that feed out on
statistically on behavioral patterns, but right now in an
animal that's making a decision, what's the neuroscience that's
actually happening, there you get this picture of this
extended holistic, deliberative, integrative processes of the of the
whole system trying to accommodate to new information. Work
through a set of options and figure out what
to do. And so for me that neuroscience. That
that Robert doesn't really engage with that much, just
paints a very different picture from the kind of
behavioral epidemiology where you know the the picture that
you get, I think it's just not an accurate
one. It's just very inflated and and it lends
itself to these rhetorical um. Arguments that I think
don't help us get to uh uh an accurate
scientific picture.
Uh, YEAH, and please correct me if I'm wrong,
but I think, or I got the impression from
your debates that there are at least many aspects
where you agree, particularly when it comes to probably
the basic science that provides a basis to the
debate, like the neuroscience, the biology, probably evolutionary aspects
of it as well, physics. Probably not so much,
but, and also you probably disagree also when it
comes to the social psychology that Doctor Sapolsky cites
in his book, which I think is actually one
of the weaker points because at least some of
those studies haven't replicated well. So, but, but then
at a certain point you part ways. Where do
you think that point is exactly?
Well, it's interesting. I mean, one of the things
that we do agree on is that the uh
most popular philosophical stance for many scientists and philosophers,
which is compatibleism doesn't hold up, right? So the
idea of compatibleism, which really, um, you know, is,
is concerned with physical predeterminism, the idea that at
the lowest level of physics, everything is deterministic. Um,
THERE'S an argument to be, so, so usually in
the free will debate historically, it's like that's the
way it's set up is this dichotomy, free will
versus determinism. If determinism is true, free will has
a problem, right? And so free will skeptics would
say, yeah, that's that's true, um, but compatibleists will
say no, even if the world is completely deterministic
at physical levels, at the lowest levels of physics.
Um, WE can still say, we can still mount
a defense at least of moral responsibility. If not
free will in the sense that you could have
done otherwise, at least we could say, well, still
what you did, you did for your reasons and
you were the cause of it happening and the
source of causation is within you as an entity
and therefore you can be held morally responsible. And
uh both Robert and I don't accept that view
at all. I think we both sort of are,
are a bit perplexed by it because it just,
I mean for me, first of all, obviously there's
no choice, right? So what are we even talking
about? Um, BUT also more fundamentally, In a universe,
if the universe were like that, how would you
ever get to having agents? Where do they come
from? You know, if we don't have variation and
selection and macroscopic causation, I mean the the the
whole point of of low level physical determinism is
it leaves no scope for microscopic causation. There's nothing,
there's no slack in the system. Everything just happens
based on the low levels. So, um, yeah, so
Robert and I agree on that. I think we,
we agree on, you know, that taking an evolutionary
approach is, is useful. We part ways on the
neuroscience of decision making itself in that he has
this view, um. Where, you know, I think he,
he thinks of the brain as a great big
complicated stimulus response machine. Put in the stimulus which
is given what we know about the current state
of the world uh and turn through the algorithm
and it spits out one answer, right? That's the
sort of cartoon picture of deliberation that he invokes
and that's his whole argument basically. Um, AND so,
yeah, I completely disagree that that's an accurate picture
of what's going on. It doesn't fit the neuroscience,
it doesn't fit the psychology or cognitive science, um,
and it doesn't even fit the first person phenomenology
of what it feels like to be making a
decision under conflict. So yeah, I guess that's our,
that's that's where we part ways.
OK, so let me ask you now, because I
think that this is something that um Robert Sapolsky
would also argue for and I want to hear
your thoughts on it. Do you think that it
would be possible for us to somewhere in the
future by gathering a lot of information on people's
uh personality, prior experiences, and so on to be
able to predict people's behavior with at least a
high degree of accuracy. And if so, what kinds
of implications would that have for the free will
debate? Yeah.
First of all, I think we do predict each
other's behavior with a high degree of accuracy all
the time, right? That's why we're not constantly surprised
by everything that everybody does, because we have expectations
of behavior based on the social settings based on
knowledge of people's character and personality. I mean, so
much so that when people really start acting out
of character, we often take it as a sign
of of mental illness, right? So we're really good
at predicting people's individual people's behavior that we know.
We're not as good at predicting the behavior of
strangers, except in a broader sense where we say,
OK, a person in this scenario, right, a person
who has gone to a restaurant is likely to
sit at a table and order food. That's fine,
right, but we don't know if they're gonna prefer
uh lasagna or calamari, so, um, so. Yeah, I
think we can, we can think about, you know,
predicting each other's behavior as something that we just
do all the time. That's in fact that's kind
of social cognition is the whole edifice on which
civilization is built, right? That's that's our superpower, right?
That's what that's what enables us to be a
hyper-social cooperative species, right? So, uh, so we already
do that. Now the question is like could you
do it uh in a really deterministic way by
having some Measurements of things, right? So, if we
think about personality psychology, what personality psychologists try to
do is look at the broad dimensions along which
human behavior tends to vary. So one of those
would be, it's like extroversion introversion, that's a dimension
along which people tend to vary. And it captures
across the population and across many, many different contexts.
It captures some patterns of behavior and allows you
to kind of understand. In that context why someone
who's more extroverted would tend to behave like this
more often than not, right? But it's really statistical
and it's really abstracted from particular contexts. In fact,
that's the whole point is to get away from
the particularities of any individual's life and any individual
situation context and instead see, here's the dimensions, here's
the sort of broad Principles of human behavior. So,
you know, if if I gave you a personality
test and I have your scores in front of
me right now, and then I, I wanted to
say, OK, hm, what's Ricardo likely to say next?
Well, his conscientiousness score is 6 and his extraversion
score is 20. Uh, THAT has zero predictive power
for me, right? So the question of kind of
what parameters would you need to get. Uh, IN
order to scientifically predict someone's behavior and ultimately, I
think you'd have to collect all of the particularities
of their history and all of the particularities of
the context that they're in. In in such a
way that it becomes so idiosyncratic, that it just
doesn't become a scientific enterprise in the sense of
science looking for these abstract rules and principles that
it can apply because it just becomes A web
of particularities, right? So, um, so I'm not inclined
to think that um we'll be able to make
these kinds of predictions about anything. Complex, you know,
it may be possible in a brain scanner to,
you know, 100 milliseconds before somebody does it to
predict whether they're going to flick their right hand
or their left hand. Fine. Like who cares? It
doesn't help. Uh BUT but having, you know, more
sophisticated kind of behavioral predictions. Uh, We can predict
trends of behavior. We can sort of statistically predict
behaviors, um, but, you know, it's a question of
how does that help? I mean, for example, you
can predict statistically that you and I, because we
both have a Y chromosome, are more likely to
be violent, physically violent than people who don't. Now,
what are you gonna do with that information? Nothing.
Were you gonna lock us up preemptively because we're
in the group of people who who commit 90%
of homicides.
Yeah, maybe minority report style or something like that,
yeah, exactly, so there's a lot of sort of
science fiction scenarios which can be appealed to. Uh,
BUT when you look at the actual science of,
of, of human behavior, what we have on the
one hand are these statistical aggregates and and and
patterns, and then on the other hand, the real
messy contextual particularities of any individual human's existence.
Yeah. So, uh, before we move on to other
topics, let me just ask you one last question
about your debates with Doctor Sapolsky. Did you change
your mind in any way, even if just a
small way? Or,
you know, it would be good. I, it would
seem like I were a good scientist, uh, if
I, if I did change my mind, right? I
should be open to having my mind changed, um.
I didn't change my position. I changed the way
I think about. Talking about it, um, and you
know, it, it highlighted. I guess for me some
of the, the, the different views that people can
have, including not just Robert, but many, you know,
people in the audience of course of those debates
who um you know, also may bring something to
um to the debates and it might be a
kind of, you know, it might be this sort
of closet dualism. It might be a lack of
um Uh, you know, belief in the concept of,
of, of emergence as a, as a naturalistic sort
of thing, or, you know, various other things like
hangups about mental causation, for example, like how could
a thought push material stuff around, those kinds of
things. It's interesting to dig into the psychology, I
think, of free will skepticism because it often hangs
on underlying Things and notions of causation and things
that aren't, uh, you have to, you have to
excavate them a little bit. So, um, yeah, I
guess I learned those things. I don't, hm, did
I change my mind? Again, I should, I should
say I should find something to say I changed
my mind about. Um, I don't think I did
really, no.
I mean, even if we, if it was just
in terms of how you consider Doctor Sapolsky's arguments,
I mean, are you at least a little bit
more sympathetic towards some of them, or
I'm, I think I understand where they're coming from
better and let me say, I mean, I, you
know, I, Robert is a lovely guy, he's really
um I think genuine. Um, GUY and, um, you
know, thoughtful, clearly, I, I don't agree with the
conclusions of his thinking, but, um. But yeah, you
know, I've I've enjoyed interacting with him and I
think he's, you know, it's his motivations are interesting
in the sense that I I I think you
know one of the reasons why he wants to
argue against free will is um this idea that
we're constantly blaming people, right? So, and I think
it's it's colored by the American system in which
he's embedded. That um there's this sort of meritocratic
view there where, you know, if you're successful, it's,
it's because you worked hard and you obviously deserve
your success because you have it, right? That's the
sort of the the tautology of the meritocratic argument.
And if you're poor and um you know, you're,
it's just because you've made bad choices. AND you
should be blamed for that. And in a sense,
you shouldn't be entitled to any help, right, or
sympathy. And that's what he's kind of um arguing
against. I think that's his underlying motivation and it
goes all the way to the to the legal
system in terms of, um, you know, his argument
that we should take into account people's prior circumstances
and history and so on. But Um, so I'm
completely sympathetic to, to all of that, and I
think it's absolutely important to understand that, you know,
people in poverty, for example, don't have the same
degree of freedom as people who have more resources
and a luxury of more time and uh social
safety nets and financial safety nets that allow them
the freedom to make better choices and longer term,
you know, follow longer term goals and so on,
right? So I think all of that is really
important, um, but for me what that highlights is
that free will is not an all or none
thing. It's a graded thing, right? And it's important
to understand precisely for the reasons that Robert is
articulating why some people's freedom is is constrained by.
External circumstances but also by their internal constitution, right?
You know, someone may be genetically and developmentally more
impulsive than somebody else. And so, you know, should
we blame them for that? That's a, that's a
valid kind of discussion to have and it's an
interesting argument um to have and in fact my
prior book uh innate was all about how the
way our brain is wired shapes shapes who we
are in ways that are really innate that we
didn't choose, right? Um, THE problem is when Robert
goes all the way to the extreme metaphysical position
that nobody has any agency or free will at
any moment ever, then he completely undercuts the argument
that he wants to make. Like if everyone's at
zero, what comparison are you drawing? What contrast are
you drawing between people with lots of freedom and
and to exercise their agency and people with lower
freedom. If everyone's at zero, it doesn't. It just
doesn't seem to make any sense. So I'm very
sympathetic to the The notion that we should take
into account people's uh circumstances both sort of internally
and externally, in considering their behavior. In a way
I think we already do that. I mean the
legal system already does that, right? The legal system
already differentiates between minors and adults because we know
that the minors have less behavioral control. It differentiates
between schizophrenics and healthy people, between people with drug
addiction or not and it differentiates between people who
were, you know, had a history of abuse and
neglect as children versus didn't. So, um. Yeah, I
just don't think we need to go to push
the, the, take the, the metaphysical nuclear option to
make those points. I think, in fact, it, it
undermines making those points when you, when you do
that.
So just to close off this section on free
will, how do you think we should reframe the
free will debate in science? Because as far as
I understand it, it tends to start from a
determinist position.
Yeah, OK, so, um, It does. And so the
first thing I'll say is that, is that yes,
we can just get rid of that, right? OK,
so um I have a paper out um now
on the archive with um my student Henry Potter
and George Ellis, who's a very eminent physicist. Which
is just collecting all of the evidence that physics
is not in fact deterministic, right? It's not deterministic
at quantum levels and it's not deterministic at classical
levels either and it never has been. It's just
an assumption or an idealization that's useful mathematically sometimes,
um, but there's no, it's not a result of
physics. So the idea that we need to start
this debate on that turf is just wrong. We
don't we, that's not an accurate picture of what
the universe is like. So instead we have to
flip that and say, OK, well, actually in a
universe where there's this low level indeterminacy, where the
future is open and many things could happen, well,
now how does, how, how do you get a
uh an agent with some control in that kind
of a system, right? How does an agent make
happen what it wants to happen in this big
possibility space and that reframing, I think, um, kind
of highlights the notion of emergent microscopic organization where
entities at higher levels have powers unto themselves that
constrain things lower down, and that's a flip uh
away from this bottom up reductive causation view. Um,
AND, and, and it also, you know, allows us
to take a kind of a more historical view
of, of the emergence of these things both evolutionarily
and within an individual's lifetime in terms of accumulating.
Um, CAUSAL potential as I was talking about earlier.
So that's, um, that's one aspect of I think
reframing the free will debate within science. But the
other aspect would be to just get over it,
right? You just get over the yes or no
question and say uh let's just agree yes and
then ask what in what way, right? And what
does it mean? Uh, WHAT are the systems that
enable that and if you just like the easiest
thing to do is just replace free will with
Executive function or behavioral control or decision making or
action selection or whatever those kinds of things are,
right? And actually get down to the nuts and
bolts in a way that um doesn't get hung
up on metaphysics and can be operationalized like we
talked about earlier in artificial systems, right? So it
just, it just means that we can just get
down to it, to a to a science of
free will. Without, uh, you know, once, once we
get the clear, clear the metaphysical brush, uh, out
of the way.
Mhm. So let's get now into your recent paper,
the genomic code, the genome instantiates a generative model
of the organism. So how do you apply the
concept of a generative model in this particular case?
Yeah, so, um, this is a paper I'm really
excited about. Uh, IT was with Nick Cheney who's
at the University of Vermont in the Department of
Computer Science. And so, It came about because I've,
uh, as a developmental biologist and geneticist, um, I've
always been concerned with the question of how the
genome instantiates the form of the organism, right? So
you can ask the question like why, and this
goes back to Aristotle. Why do kittens, why do
cats have kittens and dogs have puppies? Why is
that, right? And it sounds like a stupid naive
kind of question to ask and that people kind
of go, what are you even talking about? But
it comes down to the question of like if
you have a fertilized cat zygote and a fertilized
dog zygote, like where's the information that determines how
those things are going to develop? Where's the cattiness
or the or the or the dogginess. And of
course, um, a lot of that is is down
to the genetic information in the genome as a
whole. Now, let me just say, of course it
needs an egg, of course it needs the right
environment. There are lots of things that are given
by the environment that are important and crucial for
development to happen along typical lines that aren't encoded
in the genome and they don't have to be,
right? They're just, they're just given so that the
evolution doesn't have to do any effort to pack
that information into the genome. OK, so given that
context, cats will develop uh cat egg will develop
as a cat because it has cat DNA, right,
if it didn't, it wouldn't. So the question is
like, how can we think about that? And um
there there's a long history of ways of thinking
about that. You can think of terms like a
blueprint. That's a very common metaphor for the, the
DNA. And it's bad, like it's a bad metaphor
for several reasons. One is, um, a blueprint, if
you think of like a blueprint of a house,
it has this isomorphic relationship to the house, that
is bits of the blueprint. Uh, MATCH bits of
the house and the, the scaled layout of the
blueprint matches the layout of the house at a
different scale, right? So, nothing like that is there
in the genome with the phenotype of the organism.
There's no such relationship between a bit of the
genome and my little finger and another bit of
the genome and my eyeball and stuff like that,
right? So a blueprint metaphor falls down pretty quickly,
but also A blueprint uh shows you what the
final product should look like, but doesn't show you
how to build it, right? It's not a builder's
plan for how to get there. So that's what
the organism needs is a plan for how to
generate the thing that it wants to do, right?
So some people have used the idea of a
program. I think we can say there is a
developmental program in the sense that there's a series
of steps that tend to happen in embryo genesis.
You get gastrulation and then you get, uh, you
know, uh, the neural tube forms and then, you
know, all these steps happen in a, in a
certain order. So that's one meaning of the term
program. It's just a set of steps that happen
according to a certain schedule. But of course the
program uh invokes or evokes the idea of a
computer program, right? This highly algorithmic thing where there's
a series of steps laid out, written really clearly
and separately. Um, THAT'S just run through in, in
series. And again, if you look in the genome,
you don't find a step that's written in one
part of the genome that says gastrulate and another
step here that says neolate or make a brain
or whatever, right? So, so that view also kind
of um falls down and, and both the blueprint
and the program also. So really deterministic, right? Like
there's just, it's just algorithmic or it's just this
clear kind of mapping, right? So those things are
not um good models either. Um, AND what we're
appealing to here is a different notion which is
really inspired by machine learning and by neuroscience as
well and it's the notion of a generative model.
And we're all familiar with that these days because
that's what chat GPT is, the generative model of
language. Um, THAT'S what mid journey is, is a
generative model of, of images, right? And the way
that that works is a model, say for, for
image generation is trained on lots and lots of
images that usually are um labeled in some way.
So um that's when we're doing, you know, when
you do the captcha thing that says tick all
the boxes with a bridge or a fire hydrant
or something like that, we're training these uh things
for their, for their image recognition, right? So the
original kind of things were image classifiers, right, so
they could be trained on lots of pictures of
different things, dogs, cats, horses, houses, whatever, right? Told
what they are, and then they build these uh
kind of compressed representations that distinguish these different categories.
So the, the point of that is that they're
abstracting general uh information about the pattern of dogginess
versus cattiness, say. So that when they see a
new picture of a dog or a cat, they
can fit it into these high level abstract categories.
And then, of course, uh what happened was people
were using that to say, well actually I can
use this to do it in reverse and make
a new picture of a dog, or a new
picture of a cat. So that's when it becomes
a generative model, they use that abstract compressed representation
of dogginess. Uh, TO generate a new picture of
a dog, right, a novel instance of that species.
And it struck me on hearing uh a description
of that one time. Um, YOU know, I was
listening to that and I was like, OK, so
that compressed representation is is like the genome. And
then I thought about it a bit more and
I was like, wait, it's like it's really like
the genome. I mean that's this idea of of
uh accumulating. Through training in, in which, you know,
the analogy is now with evolution, a compressed representation,
which is a generative model that allows you to
decompress through development and generate a new instance of
a species, uh, that just seems to be a
really apt analogy. And so in this paper, We,
we push on that bit and try and see
does this actually make sense? Because look, we're both
of us are highly aware of the um the
temptation to just appeal to the latest technology as
a metaphor for something in biology, right? I mean
there's a long history of doing that in neuroscience
and genetics. Um, AND so we're very wary of
taking this sort of naive metaphor and just, and
just running with it. So what we do in
the paper is try and push on it a
bit and say, you know, does it make sense
to think of the genome as a generative model?
Is the information there in this kind of compressed
representation where there are, you know, it's the details
are not in there. What's in there is a
set of relations that's highly distributed. It's not localized,
it's not isomorphic. It's really um distributed again in
the same way that the representations within machine learning
um systems are. Where there are sort of, you
know, concepts of things like latent spaces and latent
variables in these representational spaces that become super useful.
And those are useful in machine learning. They're useful
in neuroscience as well because in neuroscience we also
have we appeal to generative models when we, you
know, we were talking earlier about simulating. The outcomes
of our actions. We can simulate, you know, moving
within the world. That, that's employing a generative model
to imagine where we would be, what, what our
situation would be if we moved from here to
there, right? So, um, so that kind of concept
it just feels really powerful and to me it
feels very apt in terms of thinking about the
genome because it gets away from these really direct
1 to 1 mapping between bits of the genome
and bits of the phenotype and instead it it
captures the much more distributed collective. Um, SORT of
holistic, uh, nature of those relationships and also the
somewhat plastic nature of them in that as they're
being decompressed, you know, development is this process where
the the the the organism is trying to kind
of progressively interpret the the the model as it
goes along. Uh, IN ways that are variable, right?
So a lot of these, um, machine learning systems
like variational autoencoders. HAVE variation within them, right, and
they use that to generate a new instance of
a dog that has some variability from this abstract
form. And of course that's what development does all
the time because you don't have to add the
noise, the noise is already in there. It's just
in the processes of of molecular um jigglings around
like we talked about earlier in the nervous system.
So, so what development does is decompress that uh
representation, but in a, in a completely idiosyncratic way
every time it runs it. Right, so you can
start with the exact same genome and you won't
get the exact same outcome, but you get something
sort of pretty close. So, so that was the
sort of um what engendered the um The the
analogy and we, you know, there's a bunch more
in that paper that um pushes on it in
in different ways and sees what it has to
offer.
Yeah, and I'm going to ask you a little
bit more about that, but I mean, when it
comes to, let's say that your generative model account
is the correct one. Uh, HOW should we put
this perhaps in slightly more simpler terms, uh, to
scientifically communicate this to lay people? Because I mean,
uh, uh, as you pointed to earlier, people tend
to have these very simplistic, uh, idea or picture
of one gene corresponds to one trait or perhaps
a bunch of genes correspond to one trait. Or
perhaps there are traits that are produced or perhaps
some genes play a role in different kinds of
traits, but, uh, how do we move from that
kind of simplistic picture to what you're painting there?
Yeah, it's really tricky because um I mean the
appeal of a blueprint, for example, is it's it's
familiar, right? So if you're looking for a sort
of a science communication metaphor. Then obviously appealing to
something familiar that people already understand and saying this,
this complicated thing is like that, and you already
understand that, therefore you can grasp what this is,
right? I mean, that's the sort of the essence
of communication by by analogy. Um, THE trouble is
like all of the simple ones that people are
familiar with don't work. They're not apt. They're too
simple. And so the the generative model idea is
really um tricky and difficult to understand and you
know, we know it is because the people who've
done this trained these machine learning models. Now have
to do the work of understanding what the representations
are inside them, right? So we've created this thing
for the first time ever in our existence. We've
created artificial systems that we don't understand how they
work. It's it's incredible, right? We're having, there's now
a natural science of these systems and people are
working on lots of different ways to sort of
increase the interpret interpretability of of the encodings and
and so on so that we can get a
better grasp on them, but Uh, but the point
is it's actually just genuinely very complex, and you
get into these, um, really subtle, um, complicated ideas
like, you know, latent latent spaces and um orthogonal
dimensions in this big multi-dimensional space within this compressed
representation. And there you're into like really abstract mathematical
objects. They're very hard to wrap your head around.
Um, BUT they're crucial, I think, to understanding that
we're seeing those mathematical concepts applied in neuroscience to
great effect. We're seeing them applied in machine learning,
and I think we can apply them in terms
of genomic encodings as well in really important ways.
So, um, Which we could talk about in a
minute, but they just on your real question like
communicating it, I think this is a challenge, right?
So how can we get that across, um. I,
I, I, I just don't think we can do
it quickly, frankly, I think it just may be
the case that this is an instance where the
reality is genuinely complex and it's gonna have to
take some explaining and people are gonna have to
sit with those ideas that are very uh foreign
alien sort of ways of thinking about things and
um, yeah, do some work to wrap their head
around it. There's no easy. There's no easy fix
here in terms of the communication, yeah.
Yeah, that's fair enough. So let me ask you
now, uh, tell us about these concepts coming from
developmental biology, robustness and evolvability, and how do they
apply to the encoding we are talking about here?
Yeah, so these are really, really crucial. These two,
these two properties of robustness and evolvability which sound
like they should be opposed to each other, but
they're actually two sides of the same coin. So
we talked about earlier, you know, the noisiness in
um molecular systems and how what evolution has selected
for is is collectively robust microscopic organizations. That are
in a sense insensitive to all this sort of
momentary fluctuations going on within them, and instead they
managed to maintain a regime of activity, right? A
a regime of dynamical processes, um, that at a
microscopic scale is, is, is robust and persistent. So
you can think about a single cell, uh. Um,
A single-celled organism as trying to do that. And
of course what it does is react to changes
in its internal states through homeostatic mechanisms. So it
takes some sort of negative feedback. It says, oh
no, I've been pushed, I've been pushed out of
where I want to be. I need to take
this action to bring that back down to where
it should be, right? And that's basically what a
lot of metabolism is is doing and what the
responses to external cues and so on are for.
Now, in development, you have the same kind of
problem. It's just magnified because instead of one cell
state, you've got thousands and thousands of different cell
states that you have to make. Uh, YOU have
to make them all stable, right? Each of those
states now is the, the sort of we got
these multiplexed options encoded in the genome, right? Where
the genome has to encode a liver cell state
of some genes on and off as a stable
attractor, uh, in a dynamical system and it has
to encode a muscle cell state and a nerve
cell and all these different like thousands and thousands,
right? And of course it has to build them
in the right order, in the right place with
with respect to each other, right? So that's the
magic of developmental biology, that's what developmental biologists have
been studying for centuries and um we know a
lot about the mechanisms whereby embryos get patterned, different
cells differentiate in response to different signals, um, how
gene expression is, is, um, you know, modulated and
um. And put into these different patterns and then
and then stably held in those patterns so that
cell types remain what they are, right? So all
of that has to be robust and it has
to be robust to noise in the first instance,
right? You got all these molecular stuff jittering around,
the systems have to be able to buffer some
variation there. Now the interesting thing is you get
something for free when you have a robust system
like that, which is evolvability. And the reason is
if the system is robust to all those molecular
jitterings, it should also be robust to some genetic
variation that maybe says, OK, maybe make a little
bit more of this protein or a little bit
less of that protein under these conditions. Now, the
cells already used to working with slight variations in
the levels of different proteins at different times, right?
It's evolved to be robust to that. As a
consequence, what happens is genetic variation can build up
in the system. Without affecting the phenotype, right? So
the phenotype is is channeled into the sort of
broadly speaking, uh, an optimal outcome. Or at least
a viable outcome. Despite all this noise. Now, that's
up until a point when the genetic variation does
begin to affect the phenotype and then you get
evolvability, then natural selection steps in and goes, yeah,
I like that, or I don't like that, it's
a little bit better, it's a little bit worse,
right? Um, SO, so you get this, uh, the
robustness allows genetic variation to build up in the
population. That becomes then the substrate for evolution. So
we don't have to think of evolution as this
kind of One step at a time, one big
hit, uh, one big mutation totally changes things, right?
Um, WHERE like one mutation means lizards suddenly didn't
have legs and now they're snakes. And like, so
mommy and daddy lizard gave birth to a snake.
That just isn't the way that evolution happens, right?
But it happens in in much more gradual kind
of a way where these collective encodings in the
genome. That are uh very distributed that are affecting
different traits. Can change over time because of genetic
variation, and then evolution can have a say as
to as to whether that's that's good or not.
So you get evolvability, you get gradual evolvability from
these two aspects, the distributed encoding and the accumulation
of, of genetic variation because of the robustness of
the developmental system.
So, and this is, I think, an idea that
comes from also from developmental biology, please correct me
if I'm wrong, but then development can constrain evolution,
at least to some extent. Yeah,
absolutely. So, um, you know, evolution is not evolution
is exploring a possibility and that possibility space is
determined by where you are now, right? So, um,
Yeah, I mean that just some people kind of
make this out like it's it overturns uh Darwinian
notion so it's this big challenge to adaptationism um
and it isn't, it's just a sort of a
the context in which that happens, right? Of course,
I couldn't have a mutation like uh Angel in
the X-Men and just sprout wings from my back,
right, because that phenotype is not available uh to
me, OK. Um, I could have a mutation that
gives, gives like web fingers. That's a, that's a
phenotype that's available from my current generative model. I
could get from A to B, right? By tweaking
the generative model a little bit, you could get
there. So it's a question of saying, OK, what's
the current generative model? What's the form that that's
broadly instantiating? And if you tweak it, how can
you push that form in in in different ways,
right? So, um, so that's just the context of,
um, that, that shapes the possibility space for, for
evolution. And of course what's interesting there is that
every change that you get reshapes the possibility space.
So, um, that's why evolution is this open-ended creative
process is because the possibility space is not fixed.
It's, it's like you know the video game worlds
where as you move around in the world, it
populates new things. It's kind of like that, right?
So we're moving through this possibility space, new options
become um become available and I think that's an
important way of thinking about the dynamics of evolution
through time. It's, it's just Uh, it's a creative
process.
So I think you've already addressed this topic, at
least to some extent earlier and this probably also
links to the concept of robustness again, but how
is then with all of these noise that we
have during the process of development, how is a
new individual of a certain type produced reliably?
Yeah, OK, so, um, yeah, again, the robustness is
uh is a selected property, a selective selected collective
property of the whole genome, right, where, um, and,
and the reason The the reason that it's there,
even though evolution is not trying to make things
robust, it's just like the the the ones that
don't produce robust offspring don't. Persist, right, so it's
just a kind of an outcome of um of
evolution selecting for genomes that robustly produce viable offspring
given this background of of noisy components, right, so
robustness is just is just what emerges from that
from that process without having to be directly selected
for. Um, SO, yeah, so you can think of,
of the developmental processes as, as, as channeling development
towards a particular kind of phenotypic attractor state which
is just viable member of the species. And within
that, of course, there's gonna be lots of variations.
So for example, within humans, right, we're about, we
have an average species typical height. But there's lots
of variation around that and that's fine because it
doesn't uh uh materially affect um survival or fitness
or how many offspring we have. Uh, FOR the
most part. So, um, so there can be lots
of variation that's simply tolerated in the phenotype. OK.
And then of course occasionally you'll get, you know,
big mutations or big disturbances to the system that
produce an outcome that's less well tolerated, and those
are conditions that we call diseases or disorders um
that do have an effect on, on fitness and
and generally what happens is that then they tend
to be selected against right so. We think of
evolution as this force of positive selection, where it's
shaping these cool new things. It's like, oh, look,
wings, that's cool. Let me positively select for whatever's
making wings, uh, or running faster or seeing farther,
you know, all those kinds of things, but actually,
you know, most of the evolutionary action is negative
selection. It's saying nope, nope, nope, don't like that,
that's not good. Um, SO, uh, you know, it's
just, uh, keeping, keeping the, it's just maintenance basically,
it's like keeping a bad mutations out of the,
out of the gene pool. So that kind of
process is, is happening all the time and that's
the reason why we have this the the genome
is being in a sense protected um because, because
really bad mutations that impair the robustness are being
selected against all the time.
Mhm. I mean, when you use there the word
channel link, it came to mind the idea uh
suggested by Conrad Weington of the epigenetic landscape. I
mean, there, is there a link there?
Yeah, absolutely. So um Conrad Waddington in the 1940s
and 1950s, um, he was an embryologist and he
had some very prescient um ideas about the way
that development works and a lot of what I've
just been talking about is absolutely informed by his
thinking. So. He had this this structure called the
epigenetic landscape, which, you know, some of your listeners
may have seen. It's a, it's a kind of
like a rolling contoured hillside, I imagine, um, slightly
sloping down with a with a little ball at
the top and the ball kind of rolls down
and it can, it can go one way or
it can go the other way, but when it
goes one way or the other, it kind of
gets channeled into these, into these valleys. So what
those valleys represent is the is the possibility space
and in more modern terms, uh, in dynamical systems
talk, we would call those attractor states. And in
fact, um, Waddington actually used that term of attractors
in, in the landscape. So he kind of um
prefigured in this just a visual metaphor, the kind
of thing that we now see in our really
formal mathematical models of cellular differentiation and and development,
right. So his idea was that those different states
could represent, say, a skin cell or a nerve
cell, right? But the point is that you don't
want to have intermediate cell types, right, as development
is happening, you want to channel individual cells down
one trajectory or another to these stable final states
that you then want to have maintained. Now, you
can sort of expand that, right? You can draw
way way back and say you can talk about
the whole phenotypic um the whole phenotype of the
organism as a tractor states, right? So. Um, YOU
know, having, having 5 fingers on your hand is
in a tractor state and development is trying to
channel things in such a way that that's a
robust outcome, despite the fact that we all have
mutations that affect the level of different proteins that
are involved in in signaling and growth, uh, of,
of different fingers and so on, right? So, um,
So yeah, so the, the, the job there of
the developmental system again is to robustly channel the
outcome both at the level of individual cell types
and morphogenesis of of of the whole system and
um you know, I think obviously also the the
patterning of the brain. And the kind of, you
know, nature of the organism we've been talking so
far about the form of the organism because that's
the most kind of obvious thing to wrap your
head around, the form of a cat versus a
dog. But there's also the nature of a cat
versus a dog, and that is entailed in the
form of the of the of the brain, right?
The way that their brains are wired. And and
so that becomes a really interesting idea to think
about um. How evolution is now having an opinion
about the behavioral dispositions or tendencies or capacities of
different species and whether that's a good phenotype or
not. Be behavior becomes a phenotype that is judged.
But the underlying substrate is the wiring of the
brain, which is just a special instance of the
genome, the generative model encoding the form of the
organism.
Is there any link between what you were explored
in this article and the biology of free will?
Um, I guess kind of very, very broadly conceptually,
there are some themes there that, um, that I
think are interesting. The theme of, of, you know,
noise and indeterminacy being harnessed in some way and
channeled. I think you can make you can make
some analogies uh with the kind of processes we
were talking about in in deliberation and decision making.
Um, You know, they're kind of, they're kind of
loose in, in one sense. I'm, I'm a little
undecided myself as to how um how tight or
formal those analogies are, um, but I do, you
know, I do think there are some there that
are that are interesting. Um, YOU know, one aspect
of free will that some people talk about is
is just genetic determinism where they'll say, look, we
can show that your genes affect your personality traits,
um, therefore, you know, you were just genetically wired
this way, it's just in your DNA right? And
actually, you know, when you look at the way
that development actually proceeds, what you can see is
that the, the generative model in the genome constrains
the possibility space, but, but still uh tolerates some,
some variation within that space. And so if you're
thinking about the wiring of the brain and our
personality predispositions, there's a, it's actually quite tolerable the
way that those things uh emerge, right? And of
course you know we won't fully understand uh we
nearly understand the relationship between wiring of specific circuits
and those and those high level personality traits, and
they probably don't map to individual circuits, they're probably
more collective um properties, right? But anyway, at least
in terms of free will, we can say, look,
the genetic deterministic argument just fails because development is
just not deterministic, it's probabilistic. And the relationship between
the genome and the eventual outcome. Has to go
through development. It's not a blueprint, right? It has
to involve these processes. Those processes are inherently variable.
And so, uh, at least we can say it's
not just your genes that made you the way
you are. Maybe it doesn't help because then you
can just say, OK, well, it's the idiosyncratic way
that my brain developed that makes me the way
you are. I am, and you know, that's fine,
that may absolutely be true. It does get to
a different question which is Uh, you know, in
terms of things like genomic predictions, how accurate they
could ever be, not just in practice based on
what we know, but in principle. Like the, the,
the, the nature of the relationship between the genome
and the phenotype. IS just limited. There's other sources
of variants that we'll never be able to get
at, because they're inherently part of the noise of
of development.
So, for the last part of our conversation today,
I would like to ask you about a recent
paper you've written with Doctor Henry Greeley on human
embryo editing. I've had Doctor Greeley on the show
twice. We uh we focus mostly on the side
of things and perhaps a little bit on the
philosophy as well. So tell us about this paper
and how it might link also to the topics
you explore in the previous paper we talked about
the genomic one.
Yeah, so um. This paper which I wrote with
Hank Greeley and Shai Carmi was a response to
a paper that came out in Nature which was
arguing that um that using some sort of statistical
models of risk for various disorders that are based
on um genetics, genetic studies. That we could drastically
reduce the risk of some common conditions like heart
disease, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's, diabetes, if we edited the genomes
of embryos in multiple sites. Now, The important thing
about a condition like schizophrenia is it's, it's quite
highly heritable, a lot of the variation between people
who get schizophrenia or don't is down to genetic
differences, but it's not like there's one gene, right?
It's not like cystic fibrosis where you could say,
OK, if I have an embryo, um, I can
genotype this one gene and I'll definitely know with
a 100% predictive power whether or not it will
develop cystic fibrosis, right? So there are some genetic
conditions like that, but common conditions. Like schizophrenia, heart
disease, the ones I mentioned, are not like that.
They're polygenic. So many, many genetic variants influence them
and probably thousands, right? Probably thousands of genetic variants
across the whole genome. Collectively contribute to differences in
individual risk of these conditions and collectively they explain.
Some percentage of the variants, usually it's a low
percentage, right, you know, for schizophrenia, the, the sort
of the common variants that we know about in
the genome maybe captured about 10% of the variants.
OK. So against that backdrop, the argument was that
if you edit as few as 10 sites, 10
of those common sites, each of which has a
tiny little effect by itself, you could make a
drastic reduction in risk and, you know, the strategy
was to Identify sites where there was a rare
mutation. That seemed to be protective, where the common
allele at a locus was actually the risk allele,
where like 99% of the people in the population
carry the risk allele for schizophrenia, which is a
weird thing, but there are sites like that where
there's a a very rare mutation. Uh, THAT'S, you
know, like at 1%, 2% in the population, where
people who carry that seem to have a lower
risk. OK, so they looked at those and they
said, well, look, most people don't carry those rare
protective mutations, so maybe we could edit a bunch
of those into an embryo and now it would
be kind of super protected against these conditions. And
they use some statistical models which are Very mathematically
simple. So they basically just say, OK, each one
of these has a reduction in risk, statistically speaking
and across everyone who who carries it, who we
surveyed so far, of like You know, you go
from a risk of of one as a baseline
to 0.98 or something like that, right. Uh, AND
then if we add them up, um, multiple ones,
we just add them up together and that reduces
the risk by, by a certain amount. And you
know, if you put 10 of them in it,
they, their model suggested a massive reduction. So the
paper came out in Nature, it was by Peter
Viser and and others including Julian Savulescu, who's a
biomedical ethicist, um. And it was surprisingly gung ho.
Like it was absolutely, first of all, it was
just an imagined scenario where we could in the
first instance, make these edits in embryos using CRISPR
technology or something else with perfect precision. OK, so,
so they're, they're just imagining there's no chance of
something weird happening which is not at all where
the technology currently is. But even with that, um,
you know, they also just sort of took their
statistical modeling at face value. And it just basically
ignores multiple possible complications and, and risks. The complications
are, we don't know how those uh what affects
those uh genetic variants will have when you put
them in combination with each other, right? There's no
reason to think of this relationship as linear. It's
just a handy statistical model, but everything I was
talking about earlier with the generative model, these decompressed,
or sorry, these compressed representations. Distributed devolved kind of
um systems where you know they're highly, highly non-linear.
That's why it's complicated to understand them. That's why
the people who make the machine learning models can't
interpret them because they're just very, very non-linear relationships
with individual aspects of the thing that they're generating,
right? And that's the absolutely going to be the
same thing true with our genome. So it's a
really naive statistical uh approach to just say ah
we can just treat these as individual, independent to
put them into this linear model and there's no
good really empirical um support for that in terms
of predicting for individuals. So there was that, there
was the danger of playotropy, which is this term
which means that a genetic variant that say uh
decreases risk of schizophrenia might do lots of other
things, right? It might affect lots of other traits.
It might increase risk of heart disease. It might
increase risk of cancer, right? So, um, we know
absolutely that many, many genetic variants are leotropic. They
affect lots of different traits. So each individual trait
is affected by lots of variants, but each individual
variant typically affects many traits. So given that complexity.
It's very hard to predict. Uh, A whole array
of possible unintended consequences that might arise if you
select for. Protective alleles versus schizophrenia. It was like,
OK, well, what comes with that? We don't know.
Uh BECAUSE we just don't have the, the, the
information on each of those either individually or definitely
not in combination. So those were sort of major
issues and especially with rare alleles, you know, these
are alleles, these rare protective alleles. Well, they may
be rare for a reason, right? I mean, we
talked about um negative selection, keeping a lid on,
keeping, you know, deleterious mutations at a low frequency.
Well, the corollary is if we see things that
are at a low frequency, maybe they're deleterious. And
so even if there may be a sort of
a beneficial aspect in terms of reducing risk of
some condition, it's quite possible that those rare alleles
do have some negative um effects that could go
along with them. So we were really concerned with
the tenor of this paper which, you know, took
this kind of fanciful idea both technologically and statistically
and really made the the the argument that Not
only is this a thing that we could do,
but it's a thing that we should do, right?
Ethically speaking, Savulescu makes this argument that any time
we could intervene anywhere in a way that would
be seen as having some benefit, we must do
that, right? That's sort of his, his ethical stance.
Whereas like many other people, um, I would take
instead the precautionary principle as a guide and say
first do no harm. And uh you know, another
way to put this would be, uh, don't fuck
about with a complex system and expect good things
to happen. You know, it's like genuinely complex. It's
not this thing you can't linearly decompose it into
these different bits. That's just not how it works.
That's not the nature of the relationship between genotype
and phenotype. So, um, yeah, we got a little
I, I, I guess exercised over the, the tone
of it because it just felt, um, it felt
a bit irresponsible, frankly, and, um, and it also
feeds into this sort of resurgence of eugenics that
we're seeing these days. Which is weird, uh, and
it's really fundamentally based on an idea that we
have much more knowledge and much greater predictive power
based on uh genotypic information than we actually do
have or ever could have.
Uh, IT'S interesting that you mentioned eugenics because I
was actually going to ask you a little bit
about that. I mean, not necessarily about eugenics, but
about a specific claim made by certain pro-natalist eugenicists,
uh, about the traits that are probably even more
complex genetically than heart disease, even like intelligence, because
I've heard some of them claiming. That through in
vitro fertilization and then embryonic selection, they can select
for uh uh uh they can already select for
higher intelligence. But I mean, there are a bunch
of complications there. Probably the biggest one is the
fact that intelligence, I mean, it seems that there
are probably thousands of Different genes associated with IQ
and all of that. So, I mean, I don't
know how many genes they would have to select
for or add it to even increase IQ by
1 or 2 points. But, uh, I mean, apart
from that or uh adding to that, what, what
do you think
about it? Yeah, so I mean obviously IQ is
an obsession with um People and it goes along
with certain sort of social stances that that are
uh problematic in multiple ways. So IQ first of
all is a is a proxy that we use.
It's a it's a, you know, a quantitative measure
derived from various tests. Uh, YOU know, some people
say it only measures how good you are at
taking IQ tests. I don't think that's right at
all. I think IQ actually does capture um some
aspects of of cognition. That differ between people in
ways that have important consequences in the world. OK.
So, so we've got this very, but we have
this very imperfect proxy of it. Now with that
proxy, people have done, you know, IQ tests or
other cognitive tests or even just taking things like
educational attainment, how far people go in in in
education. And then they've looked for genetic variants that
are associated with those differences, right? And that's the
same way that people found the genetic variants associated
with things like risk of heart disease and schizophrenia,
right? So they look across the whole thousands or
hundreds of thousands of people literally. For the sites
in the genome where there may be 22 variants
that exists, like some people might have an A,
some people might have a G in the sequence.
And then they say, do people with the A
end up at the higher end of the IQ
spectrum or with greater educational attainment than people with
the G, right? So they do that across thousands
and thousands and thousands of sites across the genome,
and then they find a kind of a catalog
of ones that are associated with greater or lower
IQ and then for any individual person, you can
go across that whole list and say, well, do
you have at the first one, do you have
the plus or the minus version? And the second
one, the plus or the minus. So you just
add them up and you get a normal distribution,
and that's called your polygenic score, right? So what
you find, if you do that, is that across
the population. The polygenic score really does track. The
IQ or the educational attainment or cognitive ability, whatever
it is that your phenotype was, right? Not just
in the population that they developed the tool in,
but in a test population. OK. So when you
look at a graph like that, you could say,
OK, I'm gonna split people by, say, into 10
bins based on their polygenic scores, and for each
of those ones I'm gonna plot the mean value
in this cognitive test. And then you get a
nice linear sort of relationship where people with the
highest polygenic score on average score the best. And
you could look at that and go, wow, this
is great. Look at this great tool we have
to predict people's cognitive ability. Now the problem is
that absolutely obscures the fact that there's a whole
massive amount of variation that's unexplained, that's not captured
by the polygenic score, because if you look within
any of the bins. And you look vertically at
the spread of say IQ scores, it's huge, right?
The average is a little bit higher than the
one next to it, but the spread is still
huge. So if all you know about somebody is
their polygenic score. You have hardly any predictive power
for them as an individual, because these, these are
statistical tools. They're for population averages, they're for population
variants. They're not designed to predict the phenotype of
an individual and they can't. They're really, really terrible
at it, right? So at best. You, what you
could get is a kind of a statistical prediction.
So if you have two embryos that are at
opposite ends of the polygenic spectrum, Statistically speaking, the
one at the, at the high end is more
likely to have a higher IQ than the one
at the low end. But there's a very good
chance that it would be the opposite way around
because at each of those, the spread is still
huge and the overlap between them is still almost
complete. So, um, so there's a question then I'm
like, uh, what do you do with that kind
of information? How is that being presented by these
companies and I saw a new one. Uh, JUST
yesterday sprang up, that's offering people this kind of
uh. Uh, CUSTOM iPad sort of uh display to,
to, to select between their multiple embryos, right? And
it's so it's giving this rundown for each embryo
of like hair color, eye color, um, predicted height,
predicted IQ, risk of various conditions, and you know,
some of them will be higher risk of Alzheimer's
but blue eyes and lower risk of heart disease
and then, and, and you know, it's this Gattaca
like uh idea where you could pick these things,
right? So it's basically like a 23andMe genetic profile
where you know you send your DNA in and
they send you back and say your risk of
Alzheimer's is 22%. Uh, YOU know, it might have
been 17%, but it's 22%. OK, what am I,
what do I do with that information? Nothing, right?
So, so the question is what do you do
with it in terms of embryo selection and, and
there's very different views, first of all on whether
it's ethical for people to use that kind of
information and the system in the states is very
deregulated, you can do whatever you want. The system
in Europe is highly regulated, you can only do
genetic testing for specific genetic disorders for the most
part. Um, BUT the other question is just like,
would it work? Whether, regardless of whether it's a
good thing to do or not, just scientifically, technically
speaking, would it work? Would having the polygenic score
between two embryos actually be a useful predictor? And
I think for the reasons I've just talked about,
it wouldn't. And especially more so because you're not
choosing between people at opposite ends of the spectrum.
Across the whole population. You're not sampling the whole
population's worth of variants, you're sampling sibling variants, which
obviously is much a much narrower range that you
would be trying to make discriminations across. So the
ability of the polygenic score to actually really predict
would be even, you know, much, much less in
that scenario. So, um, I don't see any actual
utility there and I think the way that these
things are being advertised. Uh, ALMOST amounts to fraud.
Yeah, I mean, when it comes to eugenics, and
this will probably be my last question today, when
it comes to eugenics, uh, it, of course, the
ethics of it is very, uh, messy, but, uh,
even apart from that, there's a, the science behind
it. I mean, there's not much support for the
kinds of claims that People make it. I mean,
of course, there's also the more subjective aspects of,
OK, so we're select, we're selecting for better people
or we want better superior people to procreate among
themselves. I mean, whatever that means, I'm not sure
it depends. I, I guess it's kind of arbitrary.
But uh I mean, the kinds of claims that
they tend to make in terms of the extent
to which it would be possible to change, I
don't know particular populations in terms of their phenotypes,
particular kinds of phenotypes, uh, it tends to be
very unscientific.
Yeah, yeah, and there's a lot of things about
this that, excuse me, are um. Yeah, both I
think sort of morally and ethically questionable, but also
scientifically. So one of the things that's interesting there
is that you, you made this switch that many
of the people in this, in this sort of
discourse make, which is, first of all, they'll defend
the idea of of parental choice and basically what
you could call kind of a consumer eugenics where
right, mom and dad are having a baby. By
IVF they got multiple embryos, um, they already choose
between them. I mean, the embryologist chooses between them
in terms of just looking at them which one
is likely to get a healthy pregnancy. Uh, THEY
may be using some other genetic information, say they're
carriers of cystic fibrosis mutation, right? Um. And they
know that they are, and they do a genetic
test and they select the embryo that doesn't have,
uh, you know, both copies of that gene, right?
And, and many people would say there's nothing wrong
with that, that's perfectly reasonable, good thing to do.
Um, OF course, many embryos are screened for things
like chromosomal disorders like Down syndrome and and regularly
that's a regular um target of of um embryo
selection as well. Question is like when you go
beyond that, um. How much scientific efficacy would there
be in terms of selecting for, uh, against, say,
risk of common disorders? There's some, I don't want
to say there's none. Um, THE problem is like
one embryo might be high for schizophrenia risk, but
low for heart disease, and you know, you're sort
of mixing and matching. Um, SO just on the
selection front that becomes uh uh just a technical
challenge because there's so much going on, right? So
what are you trying to optimize for? And then
the question of selecting for traits, especially things like
IQ or personality traits and things like that, you
get this sense and uh you know, the rhetoric
of better. People, higher quality people, uh, I find
it uh very. Personally, morally repugnant. Um, THAT'S not
an argument, that's not a scientific argument, that's my,
that's my personal, um, feeling about it.
I mean it's not, it's not even a scientific
claim, right? I mean, yeah, yeah,
well, that's the thing, right, yes, I can't have
a scientific argument to it because it's not a
scientific claim, right, um, I have a I have
a personal opinion about it, um, that I just
find the, the that attitude distasteful. Uh, BUT then,
you know, OK, so all, all of that like
you've got this individual parental choice and, and, you
know, it's interesting if you start really digging into
that. Around the ethics of it, it's, it's actually
not that easy to come up with really good
arguments against it. Cause you're you're moving from one
area where it's like obviously OK into areas where
it's like, well, OK, I wouldn't do it, but
should, should it not be allowed for anybody, like
where's the, where's the harm? uh, AND it become
a little bit difficult to talk about that. Um,
The more interesting thing here though is when it
becomes really eugenics eugenics, which is a program of
gene change across a population. And there, this is
the kind of argument where people move from the
idea of just personal parental choice into saying we
should do this for society as a whole. It
would be better for society as a whole to
have more people like this and fewer people like
that. And that is eugenics in a nutshell. And
we know the horrid uh history of eugenics when
it's implemented in uh state kind of a fashion
and we've seen it, you know, people refer most
obviously to Nazi Germany, but it had a much
longer lifespan in America, for example, where, you know,
many, many thousands of people were um forcibly sterilized.
Um, YOU know, because they either sort of intellectual
disability or epilepsy or some kind of um. Uh,
OTHER, you know, psychiatric disorder or something like that.
So, you know, and this was going on to
the 1970s. So, we know what that looks like.
We know where that ends. And it's not a,
it's not a good place. Uh IT'S horrific and
um and it's based on, yeah, these notions that
some people are better than others. And like, we're
better in that case, it's like, it's better for
society to have people like that in it. And
um yeah, so again, I, I, I just find
that um morally objectionable, to put it mildly. And
something that we need to be um cognizant of
and you know on on alert for because those
kinds of of claims that rhetoric is is coming
back. It's based on a flawed understanding of, of
genetics as well as whatever. The, the, the sort
of morally problematic, uh, edifice of arguments that these
people make, but it's important, I think, at least
as as geneticists that we point out the scientific
limitations of it, the limit, the limits of genetic
determinism, um, and especially the complexities of the relationship
between genotypes and phenotypes where it's just hubris. To
think that we can predict things, that we can
go in and not just select, but maybe do
genome editing and know what the outcome is gonna
be and not face unanticipated consequences because complex systems
will kick you in the ass and that's exactly
what is likely to, to happen.
I mean, isn't it also for even from a
biological perspective, does it make any sense at all
to talk about better rates and worst rates or
good rates and bad rates. I mean, of course,
there are perhaps some very rare exceptions, very rare
conditions like Uh, cystic fibrosis, OK. Probably it's better
for no one to, to have cystic fibrosis, but
apart from that, when we're talking about more complex
traits and Uh, lyotropic effects and all of that.
I mean, does it make sense even from a
pure scientific biological perspective to say that some traits
are good and others are bad.
Mm, no, uh, it doesn't, and of course it's
a value judgment, right? So the question is, uh,
what is it that you, that you're basing that
on? What is it that you value? And you
know, if you're If you're a farmer who wants
to improve milk yield in his herd of cattle,
then great, you know, that's, if that's the trait
that you value, then you can select for that
trait, and people, of course, have done that. Now,
the problem in animal breeding is what happens when
they really, really push selection for individual traits like
that is these unanticipated consequences start cropping up. Bad
things happen, other traits change in ways that you
didn't want. Um, YOU know, it's why we end
up with uh tomatoes that have no flavor, even
though they last on the shelf for weeks and
weeks, right? You know, so, so, um, those, there
are salutary lessons to take from the history of
animal and plant breeding where people have done exactly
this kind of project. Valued one particular trait and
pushed it uh really hard to the detriment of
of other ones. Now, in human society, the question
is Yeah, what traits are valued, and there are
many different ways that you can look at that,
you know, you could say. Which traits are associated
with life success and you then, then you have
to define success in some way where again you're
making value judgments. But let's say, uh, you know,
uh, income or it could be, you know, you
could take an evolutionary approach, you could say number
of offspring, right? Uh, YOU could say, uh, longevity,
you could say you could look at disease burden,
right? You know, all of those things are, are
things that you could use in your value judgment
just it's just pragmatic. You just make some choices,
right? And there are always gonna be some trade-offs
uh between those things cause you probably won't be
able to maximize them all. At the same time.
So, you know, that's one way of thinking about
value in terms of for an individual, what's the
best way for them to be for them, for
their outcomes. But there's another way to look at
it, which is like across society, what is the
what is the best way, you know, for society
to be. Um, AND again, you can make arguments
there for, you know, say diversity of cognitive styles
is actually really important. You know, if we, if
we homogenized everybody to one end of the IQ
spectrum, we might have a really limited set of
cognitive styles. We might miss out on kind of
some aspects of creativity, for example. That are really
important in society as a whole. So that's where
diversity becomes uh a value that you could uh
or a property that you could apply value to
and that would argue against kind of, you know,
eugenics, um, approaches that are narrowly focused on one
phenotype at a time. So, you know, there, there
are no Right or wrong answers to the, they're
just pragmatic questions of what we value individually and
what we value uh across society. And I guess
what I would say to take a step back
from the actual traits that we, that we're valuing.
IS to look at the mindset of even thinking
about those, those traits and trying to kind of
commodify our children uh in a way that sort
of almost represents them as products, some of which
are better than others, some of which are even
defective, right? Um, AND to me, that having that
mindset in place instantiates a set of of of
of values that I don't want to Uh, that
I don't want to embrace myself, you know, I
think we can have a set of values which
is, here's this amazing diversity of of human beings
with different forms and different minds, uh, everyone completely
unique, even if there were identical twins, they're still
idiosyncratic, never to be repeated again and that, uh,
you know, that incredible. Diversity, uh, should be embraced,
not just accepted, not just tolerated, but embraced and,
and, you know, we can and celebrate it. So
You know, that that's uh that that the the
unprespeifiable nature of that, of that human experience, uh,
to me is is the thing that has the
most value and um even engaging in the eugenics
kind of mindset, I think undermines and threatens that,
uh, that appreciation.
Great. So just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find your work
on the internet?
Sure, uh, so I have a website called, um,
it's www.kjmitchell.com, which I need to update. Um, I
have a blog site called Wiring the Brain and
a, uh, I'm on uh BlueSky these days, mostly,
um, wiring thera. BSky.social I think is the handle.
Um, AND of course if you're interested in any
of the um the academic papers that we've referred
to, you can get them on my Google Scholar
page.
Yeah, I will also link to them in the
description of the interview. So Doctor Mitchell, thank you
so much for taking the time to come on
the show again. It's been a very fascinating conversation.
Yeah,
thanks, Ricardo. Great, great as always. Thanks a million.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
mere Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Eringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray, Zigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.